Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, a great constitutional question which I have
previously discussed with you was in the forefront of consideration here in the Senate
again this week.
This question concerns what we as a nation can do in order to assure firm leadership.
Should there be some future occasion when the President is not able to act?
The Constitution itself is not clear on this subject.
It says that in the event of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and
duties of his office, and I have the Constitution here, the same shall the bar on the vice
president, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation,
or inability both of the President and the vice president.
Declaring what office should then act as President, and such office should act accordingly
until the disability be removed, our President shall be elected.
Now you will see that the Constitution seems to talk of an acting President.
We have as a matter of fact never had an acting President.
Due to the President established by vice president John Talon.
When he assumed the office of the President, see in 1841, after the death of President
Harrison, he took the oath of office as President and contended that he was in fact the President.
This President has been confirmed six times by every vice president who succeeded to the
office at the death of a President, namely Phil Moore and Drew Johnson, author, Theodore
Roosevelt, Coolidge, and Harry Truman.
The fact that the President has been so firmly established that a vice president assumes
the office of President, rather than the powers and duties of the office, has served to inject
a great deal of doubt about what if anything can be done while a President is temporarily
disabled to do anything.
In 1881, for example, during the 80 days of President Garfield's fatal illness, he performed
but one single act, the signing of an extradition paper.
The cabinet discussed what should be done, and although all agreed that it would be well
for Vice President, author to act as President, a majority of them felt that he could not do
so temporarily, so they decided to do nothing.
And President Woodrow Wilson was ill almost the entire last two and a half years of his
second turn.
During this period, as all of you know, leaders of the Senate were refused permission to
even see him to discuss the treaty of their side.
The affairs of government were largely disposed of by decisions of the President's wife, his
decision in the White House and certain members of the cabinet.
The League of Nations was lost.
28 acts became law without his signature.
In more recent days, we have all known the concern occasioned by President Eisenhower
when he had a heart attack and with his subsequent illnesses.
And as a matter of fact, President Eisenhower has himself urged that something be done about
this problem of disability.
Thus, we have had plenty of warnings, and we have known for a long time that this is
a problem that should be solved.
In today's fast-moving world of satellites, missiles, and jets, and atomic power, we
might someday find ourselves helpless as a nation in a crucial period unless we do solve.
Whenever an attempt has been made toward a solution in the past, we have found ourselves
arguing over the tales and eventually neglecting the problems.
This year's Chairman of the Constitutional Amendment Subcommittee, I have conducted hearings
on proposed solutions.
This week, a bipartisan group of us, including a majority of the members of the Subcommittee
and of the full Judiciary Committee, introduced a joint resolution which I think is a satisfactory
solution.
I have the resolution here and is post-sponsored by quite a number of the leaders of the Judiciary
Committee in the Senate.
It is a constitutional amendment, providing the means by which the Vice President and
temporarily assume the powers and duties of the office, and by which they can be reassigned
and assumed in the event of a President's recovery.
And should there be disagreement between the Vice President and the President as to his
recovery, Congress by two-thirds vote would solve the question?
This proposal was immediately endorsed by President Eisenhower.
And I am hopeful that we can start the constitutional amendment on its ways so it may be acted
upon by the legislators of the various states this year.
It is very important that we do so.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, this weekend I am flying to Bond, Germany
to attend a meeting of the Executive Committee of the NATO Parliamentarians' Conference.
It is a very quick trip and I will be back on the Senate floor Thursday morning.
I feel that it is an extremely important trip.
As you may remember, I was one of the United States delegates to the NATO Parliamentarians'
Conference when it met in its annual session in Paris last fall.
At this meeting I was elected chairman of the Political Committee.
There was a great debate on the floor of the conference over the necessity of having
some means of attaining greater unity among the members of the NATO Alliance.
It would be surprising to have very, very strongly our allies feel about this subject.
And I believe that many people here in the United States still feel to realize how very
serious it is.
Among our allies, the Suez problem is still strongly etched in their members.
This Suez crisis almost wrecked NATO.
At that time you will remember Britain and France to whom they oil through the Suez is even
more important than it is to us.
Along with Israel, the Suez Canal.
We didn't even know there was going to be an attack and our nation ended up on the other
side, on the side of the Soviet Union.
Since in NATO we are all in an alliance together, all of whose members are supposed to support
the other in matters of defense.
You can see how serious a situation like the Suez is to the very basis and to the heart
of NATO.
And while we were meeting in Paris, while this very subject was being debated on the
floor of the conference, we had another such incident.
This one involved a shipment of small arms to Tunisia by Britain and the United States.
At a time when the French thought that Tunisia was helping the Algerian rebel, in the retrospective
time this seems like a small incident.
But many of the great tragedies in wars of history have been caused by small incidents.
And once again, it could have been avoided if there had been proper consultation among
various allies.
From all of this debate, the Political Committee, at the NATO Parliamentarians' conference,
produced a resolution calling for a two-pronged study of ways by which greater unity might
be obtained on the political and economic side of our NATO problems.
The manner by which this resolution might be made effective is one of the subjects of
the Executive Committee meeting in Bonn on Monday and Tuesday of this week.
That is why it's necessary for me as one of the authors of the resolution and as chairman
of the Political Committee to be an attendant.
The resolution calls for the appointment of a citizen's conference, composed of leading
private citizens from all of the 17 NATO nations.
To make a thorough study of this problem and to recommend to their respective nations
as well as the NATO, what might be done.
I would think of their study as something akin to the Hoover Commission's studies.
These citizens on the Hoover Commission made some far-reaching recommendations which
has done a great deal for the government here in the United States.
Most of their recommendations were found feasible and were adopted by Congress.
Some few weren't.
So it would be with the citizens' conference.
We have nothing to lose, much to gain.
The second prong of this proposal would be a hay-piped conference of citizens meeting
in 1959, the 10th anniversary of NATO, and discussing the recommendations of the citizens'
conference, bringing the meeting of NATO home to every citizen in all of our countries.
This is something that needs to be done in the schools at the Civic Club, and in wherever
people talk so that they understand the meaning and the importance of NATO.
I hope that some concrete progress toward getting these conferences underway will be accomplished
at this meeting this week.
After the bond meeting, the President of the NATO conference, Colonel JJ Fenns of the Netherlands,
Mr. Jeffrey D. Freighties, a member of Parliament of Great Britain and I, are scheduled to have a
conference with Mr. Paul Unraised back, the Secretary of NATO about the same problem.
You know, in an alliance like NATO, which is the greatest hope of the free world against
communist aggression, all of the members, all of all of the countries are in the same
canoe, so to speak.
We therefore have to paddle in the same direction.
Our efforts will be to get all of the pedals operated by the Americans that British,
the French, and the Netherlands, and so on, operating in unity.
I hope that we can do it.
Thank you, and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, I just returned from the meeting I discussed
with you last week, the meeting of the Executive Committee of the NATO Parliamentarians' conference.
As you may remember, one of the principal things to be discussed at this meeting, which was
held in Bonn, Germany, was the arrangement for a possible citizens' conference, composed
of representatives of all of the 15 NATO nations to be held later this year.
And then later on, a Hague-type conference to be held in 1959 on the 10th anniversary of
NATO.
The reason that I was in attendance is because I'm chairman of the political committee of
the conference, which produced these proposals, designed to explore ways and means to bringing
the NATO nations closer together in a political and economic way for the protection of our
freedom.
The parliamentarians, as you know, are a body which recommends to the member government.
It doesn't have the power to act itself, except in a limited capacity.
Nevertheless, composed as it is of representatives of the people elected in their various countries
to serve in their own congresses or parliament, it reflects public opinion of the countries
pretty well.
After discussing me proposed meetings ourselves and finding considerable sentiments at the
plan she'd go forward, several of us met in Paris with tall, unraised facts, because
of them of NATO, the great man of Belgium, as you know.
As he's the representative of the executive end of NATO's photospeed.
We talked with him first about the proposed citizens conference.
This would be a relatively small group, 50 or 60, citizens from all of the NATO nations
who would study and meet and meet together as long as necessary to find out the reasons
for the things that divide us and recommend ways and means of solving these problems.
This is back promised to present this proposal to the next council meeting of NATO in April.
If enough member government show that they want it, then I think this step, which I believe
to be of great and overriding importance, may be a fact she is.
We then talked to Mr. Spack about the congress meeting in 1959, and he promised also to present
that proposal to the next council meeting.
This proposed congress would be modeled along the lines of the Hague Conference of 1948,
which was inspired by that great leader Winston Churchill.
The Hague Conference resulted in the Council of Europe.
No one can promise in advance what this one would achieve, but we can hope and believe
that it would be the same kind of imaginative step for the good of free men.
As a result of all of these conferences, Colonel JJ Fenns of the Netherlands, the President
of the Parliamentarians, will upon a small group study the report of the so-called
three wise men and see what has happened in recent years since they met and study these
problems of working together.
We know that there have been many instances since then, Suez crisis.
They revolt in Hungary, the Tunisian instance, but showed very well that we sometimes have
little consultation if any at all among our color nations.
I think these things should be avoided.
In all of our studies, we shouldn't lose sight of a really big problem.
That is how to keep a group of free and independent nations working together in time of peace.
In time of war, they eventually unite.
In time of peace, however, when the steps are taken, not which wars are made, they tend
to divide.
That is my interest in this whole thing.
I want to be sure that we, all of us, are doing everything that we can now to avoid the
next possible war.
While at the meeting which was held in Bonn, Germany, that's, I first went to, I had a
very interesting personal visit with a statesman for whom I have tremendous respect and admiration.
Chancellor Conrad Eddener of Germany.
I found the Chancellor 82 years old, who was 82 years old and good of health and determined,
eager to go forward with those proposals that I have been discussing.
The Chancellor thinks that now is the time to start talking about the next 10 years of
NATO and to start planning for those years ahead.
He foresees to take the initiative on a broad humanitarian front.
And the way could be paid for that by the citizens' Congress and the Congress that we are
proposing and that I have been telling you about.
Thank you, and that's all until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, all of us have been concerned about the so-called
recession.
The latest published figures from the Department of Labor show that there are 5,200,000
unemployed.
Reports are that the March figures, when they were available, will show a further increase.
And even these figures do not show the real extent of the cut-in-the-family paycheck.
Over time, it's been largely eliminated everywhere.
And in many instances, work weeks, weeks have been greatly reduced.
Like the other recessions in our history, this one seems to have started on the far and
spread from there to the small towns, the cities, factories, and then to the industrial
areas.
Now, while I do not think it helps matters too much, at all to become hysterical about
the economy, I do think that we ought to do something about it before it gets any worse.
The road program, which the Senate passed this week, will help.
A reduction in prices, which I have been urging, would be a great benefit.
I want to discuss with you another program, which I also think would be a major benefit
to the communities of Tennessee, as well as all other states, and in which I have been
working very hard.
You know there have been many suggestions about accelerating the federal work's program,
the counteracty recession.
The new program that I have been working on in collaboration with Senator Bill Fulbright
of Arkansas, who is chairman of the Senate Banking and Currency Committee, would be
designed to accelerate local public works' programs, not by the old PWA of programs, but
through expanding and liberalizing our existing loan programs.
There is an existence a federal program for assistance to public works planning and
financing.
Its purpose is to provide low interest loans to communities for such work.
Higher rate is snarled up in many restrictions, and as such, isn't really filling the need
that it could.
For all practical purposes, it is now limited to communities of less than 5,000 population
for water and sewer disposal systems.
It provides for interest rates of 4.18% on general obligation bonds, 4.58% on revenue
bonds with 30-year materials.
This makes loans attractive only to the communities with a worse credit rate.
Moreover, this program has only $100 million off the recession.
The bill with Senator Fulbright in our proposing would greatly expand this program.
Instead of just water and sewer systems, we would make eligible public streets, sidewalks,
highways, bridges, parking lots, airports, and other transportation facilities.
Also public recreational facilities, public hospitals, rehabilitation and health centers.
Public and refuge in garbage disposal facilities.
Other public utility facilities.
Public police and fire protection work, public schools, libraries, office and other public
buildings, and public conservation facilities.
We would have the interest rate at a maximum of 1.4% above average rates on all government
debt.
This would result in a present rate of 3% the same as college housing loans.
We think 3% rate for this program would tend to bring down interest rates generally throughout
the economy.
We would increase the authorization from 100 million to 2 billion.
Now, I think the advantages of this program are very great.
First, it would be a much faster one than the public works program, and spurring the economy.
The difficulty with a federal program like the road program is that it's slow and getting
started.
The way has to be appropriated.
Plans have to be drawn.
Lands and right away have to be obtained.
However, since these are all local public works, I have an idea that they could be started
much quicker.
In fact, I think it's quite probable, and I talked with many mayors of Tennessee, and I
know this is true, that there's a large backlog of local projects in virtually every community
in the state of Tennessee as a result of post-lomberment caused by war, inflation, and tight
money.
In order to check my opinion on this, I'm writing, I'm in the process of writing letters to the
mayors of all the cities in Tennessee, a 5,000 population or more, and all the county judges
asking their comments on this program.
I'm also asking them for a list of projects, along with the cost of each, on which they could
speedily go forward if our bill is enacted.
Finally, such a program will not run up a huge federal debt.
The money would be repaid.
The project would be entirely under local direction and with local labor.
I'm most hopeful we can get this bill enacted, and we can get this great boost in our
economy to the people of Tennessee.
Thank you, and goodbyes, until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, Easter is a good time to take a somewhat longer
view than usual, and have a good look at what we have been doing here in Washington and
what we can force these for the future.
I would say that the government, both the President and the Congress, have been principally
concerned with two major problems during these first months of 1958.
One is the continuing quest for peace.
The other is the recession.
Let's talk first about peace.
For without doubt, it is our greatest hope and our most major problem.
It is a radical at the Western nations of the world, those which love democracy, which
respect the individual liberties of the individual man, and which are during this season in their
churches, temples, and center gods, carrying on great peace to religion, have lost to the
anti-religious symbols of peace.
When the eyes of much of the world, the Soviet has gained a great propaganda victory by
his decision to stop thermonuclear tests.
The Soviet Union, not the United States, took the first long step toward holding the
plunge, toward destruction in their view.
Of course we may doubt their sincerity.
We may rightly say that they waited until their latest test series was completed before
taking this step.
But what we say in this regard is contrasted with what they have done.
And even though they may have sacrificed nothing, there is an old saying that actions speak
louder than words.
And in this case, it is they who have acted.
I was among those who have long urged that the United States take the first long step
and cease its test.
It saddens me to see us lose the respect of so much of the world by not having been
the one to take this step first.
If the administration is adamantly determined to go through with the test already scheduled,
then I think at the very least we should announce to the world that following the new schedule,
we too will suspend all future tests.
Meanwhile we should go to the United Nations with a vigorous plea for nuclear and general
disarmament.
Already they are in the stutthouse of both of our nations, enough bombs to destroy most
of life as we know it on the globe today.
A reasonable hope for continuing peace will not come until we begin to dismantle what
we already have.
For as long as it exists, there is danger that it will someday be used.
And there is always the danger that other nations becoming tired of Soviet and United States
domination of the weapon will themselves throw more and more of their productive energies
into the building of thermonuclear arms.
If they do, we may find that we no longer have the power to stop this armaments' rates,
then it will be too late.
And now there is still time.
The British as a matter of fact already have a hydrogen bomb.
France is practically trying to get one and other nations are too.
And unless we stop this race, somebody someday is going to drop one.
And then we may have World War III.
Now for our second subject, the recession.
I think that Congress during these first few months has made a fairly good start at attacking
this problem.
The tight money policy has been somewhat relaxed.
The housing bill, which will mean considerably more building, and therefore more jobs in
Tennessee as well as the rest of the nation, has been enacted and signed into law.
The road bill, which provides for stepped up construction of the interstate highway system,
has been enacted.
This too will mean more jobs in Tennessee, which is an important link in the interstate
highway system.
Our personally was just to point that the community projects bill to assist cities, municipalities,
and counties and school boards in our financial plans, was not enacted before the Easter
Resets.
However, it will be one of the first orders of business after the Resets.
I have received many letters from Tennessee mayors and county judges about this bill.
What they say leads me to believe that if we can keep the interest rates on the loans to
cities and municipalities, the 3% of are below.
Then an act of this bill would mean $65 to $70 million worth of local and greatly needed
public works construction in Tennessee.
These are some of the things that Congress has been doing during the first month of this
session.
I don't say that it has been wholly a satisfactory record, at least it's a good start.
And I hope that the finish will be even more productive of good and useful work.
And I want to wish you a very happy Easter.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, I've been reading some old newspapers.
This is the New York Times of Tuesday, April 11, 1933.
It daily reports that the weather was fair with a forecast of showers and cooler on tomorrow.
Bearing light winds returned to New York with a passage by the state legislature of the
bill establishing control boards.
There was a big meeting in Rome attended by Captain Herman Goring, Vice President von
Kepplen and Premier Mussolini.
The subject on discussion was Mussolini's plan for European peace.
Newsher Valais were advertised for as little as $445.
The story that day, however, which proved a most permanent lasting value, was carried
in the left hand column of the New York Times.
Its headlines read Roosevelt Urges Bass Development Under Shoals Plan.
Return to Pioneer Spirit in Tennessee Venture is envisioned in message.
This was the beginning of the TVA, this message of April 10, 1933.
It was the 18th of May before the Tennessee Valley Authority Act was signed into law.
But that was fast in those thrilling first 100 days of the Roosevelt administration.
George Nara's whose picture I have here had been working on it for 12 years.
He was really the father of the TVA.
The power and fertilizer parts had been twice passed by the Congress, but twice vetoed,
once by a coup lege and once by a coup lege.
The new part was Roosevelt's idea of an integrated regional development.
I think that Mr. Roosevelt's original message to Congress would be worth rereading on this
month's 25th anniversary of its writing.
It is brief and I will read most of it to you.
The continued idleness of a great national investment in the Tennessee Valley leaves me to
ask the Congress for legislation necessary to enlist this project in the service of the people.
It is clear that the muscle show development is but a small part of the potential public
usefulness of the entire Tennessee River.
Such use, if envisioned in its entirety transcends mere power development, it enters the wide
field of flood control, soil erosion, reforestation, elimination from agriculture use of marginal
lands and distribution and diversification of industry.
In short, this power development of war days leads logically to national planning for a complete river watershed,
involving many states and the future lives of millions of people.
It touches and gives life to all forms of human concern.
It is a force of suggestion to the Congress legislation to create a Tennessee Valley authority,
a corporation plowed with the power of government, but the zest of the flexibility and initiative of a private enterprise.
This in a true sense is a return to the spirit and vision of the pioneer.
If we are successful here, we can march on step by step and a like development of other great natural
territorial units within our borders, sign Franklin D. Roosevelt.
In these days of false prophets in the nation and in the valley, preaching of doctrine of sale of the TVA
to the municipalities are to the power trust.
In these days of small and petty schemes, detects this great venture of democracy out of existence,
are denied even the right to borrow money.
It is well to look again at the great time and the great spirit in which it was conceived.
Upon the return of Congress and renewed consideration of the self-financing bill,
it is time for a rededication to that same spirit.
After all, ladies and gentlemen, this is one of the greatest examples of what a democracy has been able to do in an entire region.
Take a, here is this river completely integrated with dams, with navigation, flood control,
with a new opportunity for people.
It is no wonder when you see what has been done in the Tennessee Valley region that practically all of our foreign visitors,
ministers, members of parliament who come here want to go down and see the TVA in the hope that they can do something similar in their own nation.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, things have been humming here in Washington since the return of Congress after the Easter recess,
and the visits that most members of Congress had with the home port.
I certainly enjoyed my visit during several days down in Tennessee.
The major piece of anti-recessant recession legislation, the Communities Facility Bill, was passed by the U.S. Senate.
This is the bill concerning which I have spoken with you before.
It is the bill which I co-sponsored with Senator Fulbright of Arkansas, and which has had a very enthusiastic reception from city and county officials and from school and other officials in Tennessee.
The number of letters I have gotten about this bill is really amazing.
It is the way by which I think we can get the quickest results in launching anti-recession work, because its purpose is to make it possible for local public works,
long delayed by the war, tight money and rising city and county budgets to get underway now.
I found that many of these programs have already been planned and drawn up to details so that they are ready to go immediately when they can get money and a reasonable rate of interest.
It does so without the necessity of establishing a new federal agency.
The bill merely increases the present public facility loan program of the housing and home finance agency to $1 billion and expands the type of things that it can cover.
Under this bill they will include housing, school buildings, hospitals, water and sewer systems, sidewalks, and almost all other types of needed public improvements.
Furthermore, it makes it easier to pay by reducing the interest from the current rates of 4.5% to 3.5% and raising the person's 40-year maximum terms of these loans to 50 years.
I am not yet satisfied with the interest rate.
I thank for this program to work best that it ought to be 3% or lower.
I am still hopeful that this lower interest rate might be achieved when the bill is considered in the House of Representatives.
We tried to reduce it that far in the Senate but we lost by one vote.
Let me say that that 3% of federal government wouldn't lose anything on this program whatsoever.
On my recent trip to Tennessee and as a result of a flood of letters that I have received, I found that there was a tremendous backlog of public works of a local nature which can be expected to be undertaken at once when this bill finally becomes law.
Another peg in the Annie Recession Goldworks we are building became law with a President's signature of the highway bill.
Tennessee is an important part of the interstate road system.
Stretching from Bristol to Memphis and linking all of the major cities, this bill would be a great boom to the state of Tennessee.
Unfortunately, the President vetoed the Rivers and Farber's bill in which there were many projects which would be beneficial to the volunteer state.
I doubt if his veto could be overwritten.
In a separate field but one which is also caused a great deal of concern, the President of the Congress has billed on military reorganization.
It will be firstly contested by some who think that it contemplates too much power in the chief of staff and in the secretary of defense.
I am not prepared to approve the test of this bill in all of its tales.
Military organization is a complicated matter and his bill will receive considerable study before the armed services committee of which I am a member.
But I am prepared to say that I agree with his general philosophy as expressed in his message and in the bill.
I think that there has to be some one or group in charge with overall command authority in a fast moving military set up such as we have today.
And that if we had that we would save a whole lot of money.
Furthermore, I think that the best place to centralize that authority is in the civilian's head, the secretary of defense and through him to the chief of staff and down to the combat forces.
I also approve of the reduction in the number of the system secretaries.
There has been entirely too much bureaucracy and passing the book too many committees in the Pentagon.
I dare say that his bill of the president will not be approved will in milling but with a great deal of soul searching and as full and complete hearings.
The American people have never liked militaryism but they are prepared to accept command responsibility and that philosophy, our predict will be approved.
Thank you and goodbye until next week.